hello everybody my name is J I'm one of
the expert teachers here at e to
language and E to school if you haven't
seen those websites do check them out
what we're going to do in this lab class
is look at IELTS speaking and IELTS
pronunciation for South Asian speakers
these languages include Hindi Urdu
Bengali Nepali sinhala DVD Gujarati
Marathi oriya Assamese Kashmiri Hindi
and Punjabi so if you speak any of these
languages this class is going to be
helpful for you
what we're going to do is we're going to
look at the differences between English
and your first language and some of the
issues you have when you're trying to
speak English and some of the
pronunciation issues in particular so
were going to focus in on those issues
to help you improve your pronunciation
so you can sound more like a native
speaker and if you're taking a test get
a higher score in your test okay so by
the way if you speak Tamil Telugu
Kannada or Malayalam we're going to do
that in the next class for Dravidian
language speakers so if you're not yet a
subscriber to this YouTube channel do
click that subscribe button and become
one right away
okie dokie let's start with the main
differences between English and South
Asian languages
first of all in English there are 22
vowel sounds like a o etc in South Asian
languages there are only ten vowel
sounds so we have 12 more vowel sounds
that you don't have so obviously when
you're speaking English from your South
Asian language you're going to have some
issues with some of these vowel sounds
we're going to look at those vowel
sounds in particular now in English we
have 24 consonant sounds could firmer
etc but you actually have 30 consonant
sounds you have more than in English
however there are some consonant sounds
for example the and work that you have
trouble pronouncing so we're going to
look at though
in particular as well okey-dokey let's
get started and look at the vowel sounds
for South Asian speakers all right these
are all the single vowel sounds in
English these ones in green you have no
problems pronouncing for example e as in
sheep or e as in ship or R is in far o
as in good or ooh
as in shoot or ah as in up or as in
third or as in teacher you do however
have problems pronouncing these ones
like it as in bed as in cat o as in on
or as in door let's have a look at some
of them in more detail so let's look at
the difference between and ah this is a
common mispronunciation from South Asian
language speakers so don't say bed when
you're trying to say bad if you're
trying to say bad
don't say bed don't say said if you're
trying to say sad said sad don't say
dead if you're trying to say dad dead
dad don't say head if you're trying to
say had head had don't say lead if
you're trying to say lad led lad and
don't say red if you're trying to say
something is red for example red red so
if you're trying to say he is a bad man
don't say he is a bed men he is a bid
men
this is the s sound you want to make an
ass out he is a bad man ah ah not yeah
yeah let's do another example here
she was very Sid know you want to make
sure you hit the ass sound here she was
very sad
let's do one more example here the
difference between a and app in English
so if I want to say max has black
tracksuit pants ah ah ah don't say mix
has black trick suit pants try to extend
the sound of the amp to an ass sound
max has black tracksuit pants ok that is
good let's look at another one here this
time you're doing our vs. or R or R or
let's try and do some pronunciation
fixing here so don't say far when you're
trying to say for far for don't say thar
if you're trying to say tour tar tour
don't say car if you're trying to say
cor car cor don't say cart if you're
trying to say court cart court or
sometimes this one can be caught caught
caught caught there's a issue there with
the vowel sounds let's keep going
don't say part if you're trying to say
port part port don't say card if you're
trying to say court card cord
okay let's look at some sentences here
so let me say it correctly first so this
is correct okay this is he bought a new
cricket bat but was caught at short
midwicket I tried to make a cricket
analogy here he bought a new cricket bat
but was caught at short mid wickets
don't say he bought a new cricket bat
but was caught at shot midwicket okay or
or or or or that's the sound that you
want to try to make let's push on this
time we're going to look at multi vowel
sounds these are also called diphthongs
this is when you take two vowels and put
them together like a a e AE it almost
has to vowel sounds together so in
English we have more of these diphthongs
more of these multi vowel sounds than
your language so let's practice saying
them and try to articulate them
correctly so in green are the ones that
you should be okay with for example ow
as in cow air as in hair or as in
tourists ear as in here ire as in fire
our as in power these all should be okay
you may have problems when pronouncing
words like a as in wait hey wait I my
boy boy oh sure okay let's do some
practice of these specific ones we're
going to look at the difference between
a and a and a so don't say red if you're
trying to say rade red raid
don't say lead if you're trying to say
laid lead laid don't say it if you're
trying to say plate
Plitt plate don't say VIN if you're
trying to say vein then vein don't say
radio if you're trying to say radio
Radio radio don't say grit if you're
trying to say great great great yeah eh
yeah eh let's do some pronunciation
practice here so this time I'll read the
incorrect first wet concentrate you need
to go straight but don't touch the wet
paint and try not to findt try to say
wait concentrate you need to go straight
don't touch the wet paint and try not to
faint just read this for me please
make sure you're doing that a sound not
that sound
ay-ay-ay you have to so eh eh eh eh eh
this is a very Australian sound I must
say wait mate it's a very long a sound
okay let's push on what about Oh vs. Oh
Oh vs. Oh
let's have a look at some words here
don't say hop if you're trying to say
hope oh oh oh oh don't say location if
you're trying to say location oh oh oh
oh don't say fun if you're trying to say
phone oh oh oh oh don't say hotel if
you're trying to say hotel Hotel hotel
oh oh oh don't say ocean if you're
trying to say ocean oh oh oh oh don't
say Ramat if you're trying to say remote
remote remote oh oh oh oh let's look at
some sentences here I'll read you the
correct version first so I hope the
location of the remote hotel will be
near the ocean and have a phone
hope location remote hotel ocean phone
don't say hop location remote hotel
ocean and fun okay this would be
considered wrong or not wrong it's just
more difficult to understand it's
actually no such thing as wrong
pronunciation you know it's not like
one's better than the other it's just
that one is more easy to understand if
I'm a native English speaker which I am
I'm going to understand you more easily
if you pronounce these sounds accurately
so that's the difference there just
makes it easier for me actually oh and I
should say by the way if you're taking a
test and the examiner or the computer is
listening to you then also that's
important as well okay let's look at
some consonant sounds so we've looked at
the vowels we looked at short vowels and
long vowels now let's look at the
consonant sounds just before you do if
you have not yet subscribed do click
that subscribe button because what we're
going to do next after we go through the
pronunciation is I'm going to make some
videos about grammatical issues you have
in English if you're a South Asian
language speaker when you're trying to
write or speak in English and the
grammar issues you face oh do click that
subscribe button for that video which is
coming up okay here are the problem
consonant sounds so no problems with but
to go and what no problems however that
the H these ones we're going to focus on
okay this is a big problem if you're a
South Asian language speaker the
difference between what and that I see a
lot of my students having problems
making the sounds of what it is when you
make that sound as in violin or violence
or vomit for example two terrible words
is you have your top teeth on your
bottom lip and you make this humming
sound with your throat there violin
violin violin a lot of most of you I
would say say violin violin and you're
making the sound with your lips it's not
a lips and its its teeth and lips
together teeth and lips together so if
you have a look at this emoji here
this is wrong it's not wildin it's with
you it's actually your your top teeth on
your bottom lip here violin okay let's
do some practice of some individual
words so don't say wet if you're trying
to say vet wet vet
don't say violence if you're trying to
say violence violence violence it's such
a small little difference but it makes
such a big difference if you get it
wrong or right okay so for you it might
feel strange to say violence with your
teeth on your top and your bottom lip
feels weird it feels awkward feels
strange but for my ear it sounds perfect
okay so you just have to do it and
practice it feels weird for you
sounds perfectly good for me don't say
violin say violin violin violin don't
say when say van when van don't say
woman say vomit vomit vomit
don't say wery say very wary very okay
and let's do some sentences here some
tongue twisters if you like so let me
read the correct one I visited the vet
to vaccinate my vampire bat I visited
the vet to vaccinate my vampire bat okay
this is incorrect I wizard the wet to
wax innate my wampire bat so try to do
the sound
okay let's push on to the look at the
difference between duck and third so
apparently in your languages you have
more debt sounds than we do in English
we have problems pronouncing debt
apparently you have a sound where your
tongue hits the front teeth and you said
we don't have that in English so if I
was speaking your language I would
struggle to do this but the reverse is
that you guys have problems making the
sound so let's do some practice of the
sound in English so don't say that if
you're trying to say that dat that don't
say duh if you're trying to say the duh
that don't say Dro if you're trying to
say throw throw throw
don't say dink if you're trying to say
think think think
strange
you're blowing air out you're putting
your tongue below your top teeth and
pushing air think think think
like that don't say dunder if you're
trying to say
thunder thunder thunder
don't say dumb if you're trying to say
thumb dumb thumb very small difference
but a very big difference here are some
example sentences let's read this one
it's correct
3,000 Spears were thrown at the throne
3,000 throne the throne
don't say three thousand Spears would
drone at the drone
okay I think this is the last consonants
we're going to look at duck versus to
enter a say do if you're trying to say
to do - don't say that do if you're
trying to say tattoo that do tattoo
don't say Dickel if you're trying to say
tickle tickle tickle
I guess the difference here is dirt dirt
dirt dirt dirt is more at the back - is
more at the front it's a sharper sound
don't say dole if you're trying to say
told dould told don't say dollar eight
if you're trying to say tolerate dollar
eight tolerate don't say deem if you're
trying to say team team team okay let's
look at some sentences here so this is
correct I told the team to tolerate the
terrifying tackles I told the team to
tolerate the terrifying tackles this
would be imprecise and difficult for a
native speaker to understand I told the
deemed tolerate the Dera fine decals so
you need to change that dirt sound to a
to deem team dollar eight tolerate Dera
fiying terrifying tackles tackles it's a
very small difference but you do need to
practice this okey dokey that is all
from me if you want to sign up for our
free live classes for test preparation
or for general English skills including
pronunciation well for test prep
check out eetu language comm that's a
great website for PT ion so eating
this website here is also awesome it's
with general English skills and we also
have a pronunciation course but you can
sign up for free to improve your
speaking skills so check out a two
language comm and e2 school comm you can
actually sign up for both for free cool
I hope that was helpful as I said before
it's a strange thing pronunciation
because for you it feels awkward it
feels strange it feels wrong it feels
weird but for me the native English
speaker or for the examiner or the
computer who's marking your speaking it
sounds good and you need to try to shift
your pronunciation from what from depta
to subtle tiny little differences but
they make a big difference when you're
actually speaking when you're being
understood okay cool thanks for watching
my name is J don't forget to subscribe
to the YouTube channel I will see you
soon
[Music]